University at Buffalo logo 

 

PHI 579 SEM 

Ontology Engineering and Intelligence Analysis 

Semester, Year 

3 Credits 

Meeting Pattern  

2 meeting per week, 1:20 minutes per meeting (hybrid, asynchronous)  

 

​​Instructor​ 

​​Email​ 

​​Office Location & Hours​ 

John Beverley 

johnbeve@buffalo.edu 

107 Park Hall, T 9-11am 

 

​​Course Description​  

This course integrates foundational principles of ontology engineering with contemporary research in intelligence analysis. To that end, we explore ontological dimensions that inform intelligence methodologies, addressing fundamental questions related to knowledge, truth, ethics, and decision-making within this domain. 

The curriculum anchors theoretical concepts in practical intelligence contexts, transforming abstract ideas into actionable tools for analyzing and enhancing intelligence operations. Students will engage critically with a diverse array of topics, including the implications of digital warfare, the nature of cybersecurity in the global sphere, the ontology of terrorism, and the ethical considerations of artificial intelligence in espionage. 

Students will develop a nuanced understanding of innovative applications of semantic web tools, ontologies, and knowledge graphs to intelligence analysis. The goal is for students to emerge with the ability to not only grasp but also critically evaluate and contribute to ongoing discussions and developments in the field. By the end of the course, students will be well-prepared to formulate and advocate their own informed perspectives on pressing intelligence issues. 

​​Learning Outcomes​ 

Outcome 

​​Method of Assessment​ 

Critically evaluate the core literature and central debates straddling the intersection of ontology engineering and intelligence analysis. 

Participation, Presentations 

Conceptualize and advocate ontology-informed perspectives on pressing intelligence issues, showcasing innovation and depth. 

Participation, Presentations 

Demonstrate an in-depth understanding of the philosophical underpinnings that inform intelligence paradigms. 

Participation, Presentations 

Analyze how classical ontological constructs can be integrated into contemporary intelligence analysis frameworks. 

Participation, Presentations 

Identify the ways in which ethical, ontological, and epistemological challenges emerge within intelligence operations and decision-making. 

Participation, Presentations 

Employ ontological and philosophical reasoning to critique, adapt, and enhance current intelligence methodologies. 

Participation, Presentations 

Engage in independent exploration of a chosen ontological issue in AI, producing a well-reasoned and critically reflective result that contributes to the ongoing discourse in the field. 

Final Project 

 

Required Text(s) & Materials 

See schedule below. 

Course Requirements 

Students will be expected to attend and participate in class discussions. 

Students will be expected to give at least two presentations during the semester.  

Students will be expected to submit one final project. 

Grading Policy 

Weighting 

Assessment/Assignment 

30% 

Attendance and Participation 

20% 

Presentation 1 

20% 

Presentation 2 

30% 

Final Project 

 

Presentations 

 

The first step in learning to give stellar talks, is identifying what a stellar talk looks like for you. Your stellar talk won’t look like mine, but will be stellar nonetheless (being stellar isn’t a finite resource!). In the interest of practicing, students will be expected to give at least two presentations during the semester on topics of their choosing.  

 

Students will select which topics they would like to present on no later than the second week of class, as presentations will begin during the third week.   

 

Presentations will be graded based on argumentation, understanding of intelligence analysis literature and ontology engineering literature discussed in class, presentation style, and ability to address questions from myself and the class. 

 

Ideally, these presentations will be recorded and posted on one of our many ontology channels. Students are not obligated to have videos recorded or posted, however, so I will always seek permission.  

 

Attendance and Participation 

 

In my experience, attendance is vital to mastering the material covered during this course. With that in mind, I require students attend each class session, and incorporate this requirement into each student’s grade. There are two components to the grade: attendance and participation.  

Students may have valid reasons for missing classes, including military duties, religious commitments, health issues verified by a physician or qualified healthcare provider, among other things. You must inform me at least 48 hours in advance via email, when feasible. I will determine what constitutes a fair amount of work to compensate for your absence. Please see the UB policy on excused absences for more details: https://catalogs.buffalo.edu/content.php?catoid=1&navoid=19&hl=absence&returnto=search  

With respect to attendance, you are allowed to miss two sessions without penalty and without an excuse. For each class session missed beyond two, I will deduct 2% from your grade (up to 30%).  

With respect to participation, I intend to follow the rubric below:  

 

90-100% - Regularly contribute to class discussions with insightful and relevant comments. Engage constructively with peers. 

80-89% - Frequently participates in class discussions. Shows a good understanding of course material.  

70-79% - Participates in class but contributions are less frequent. Understands basic concepts but does not demonstrate good understanding of the course material.  

60-69% - Rarely participates in class discussions. Contributions show minimal understanding of the course content. 

0-59% - Does not participate in class discussions or contributions are off-topic or disruptive. Shows little to no understanding or engagement with the course material. 

 

Accordingly, it will serve you well to be prepared to discuss the course content when you arrive each day, that is, complete the readings and assignments, and be ready to engage in discussions. 

 

Events  

Ontology engineering is a thriving discipline with cutting edge research conducted in various quarters at a rapid pace. Established ontology events are listed in the schedule as opportunities to broaden your exposure to the field. Many of these events will be offered remotely.  

The instructor will arrange to have students permitted to participate in these events during normal course meeting hours. Students will not be expected to pay to attend these events and they will not be expected to participate more than the allotted normal course time. Students may, of course, participate in the full event, however.  

Minimal attendance at events of the sort described above, counts towards participation and attendance credit. For further questions, please reach out to the instructor.  

 

Final Project 

 

Students will be expected to complete a final project covering one or more topics at the intersection of intelligence analysis and ontology engineering. This may take the form of, say, a final paper written for the purposes of publication in a journal or conference proceedings, high-quality video lecture on important research results, or a rigorously evaluated ontology artifact on GitHub.  

Students should confer with the instructor as to the nature of their final project by the mid-point of the semester.  

The final project will be graded based on viability of the project, presentation, proper use of intelligence analysis and ontology engineering research as discussed in class, clarity, and creativity.  

Papers are to be typed, double-spaced, and submitted electronically through email. Citations must follow a consistent format.  

GitHub projects must be publicly available, and students must be responsive to change requests and issues raised by the instructor.  
 

Incompletes 

 

A grade of incomplete (“I”) indicates that additional course work is required to fulfill the requirements of a given course. Students may only be given an “I” grade if they have a passing average in coursework that has been completed and have well-defined parameters to complete the course requirements that could result in a grade better than the default grade. An “I” grade may not be assigned to a student who did not attend the course. Prior to the end of the semester, students must initiate the request for an “I” grade and receive the instructor’s approval. Assignment of an “I” grade is at the discretion of the instructor.  

Schedule 

​​Week​ 

​​Topic​ 

Readings 

Assignment 

​​Week 1​ 

Foundations 

National Security Intelligence Activity: A Philosophical Analysis 

Rethinking Intelligence Practices and Processes 

 

​​Week 2​ 

Intelligence Analysis: Top-Down 

Philosophical Foundations of Intelligence Collection and Analysis 

Ontology for the Intelligence Analyst 

 

​​Week 3​ 

Characterizing Information  

Aboutness: Towards Foundations for the Information Artifact Ontology 

Document Acts 

On Credentials 

Ontology of Information Artifacts in the Intelligence Domain 

Presentation 

Week 4 

Intelligence Analysis: Bottom-Up 

Whitesmith, Part 1 

Understanding Bias in Twitter-Based Intelligence Analysis 

Ontology and Cognitive Outcomes 

Presentation 

Week 5 

Intelligence Analysis: Bottom-Up 

Whitesmith, Part 2 

Towards Handling Bias in Intelligence Analysis with Twitter 

Presentation 

Week 6 

Military Intelligence Domain 

Joint Doctrine Ontology 

Complexity in Military Intelligence 

Command and Control 

Presentation 

 

Week 7 

ONTOBRAS EVENT 

 

 

Week 8 

Cybersecurity Domain: Blue Team 

Cybersecurity Knowledge Graphs 

A Common Core-Based Cyber Ontology for Support of Cross-Domain Situational Awareness 

Cybonto: Towards Human Cognitive Digital Twins for Cybersecurity 

Presentation 

Final Project Format 

Week 9 

STIDS EVENT 

 

 

Week 10 

Cybersecurity Domain: Red Team 

Ontology for ATT&CK 

A deliberately insecure RDF-based Semantic Web application 

Toward a Knowledge Graph of Cybersecurity Countermeasures 

The Ontology of Espionage in Reality and Fiction 

Presentation 

Week 11 

External and Internal Threats 

An Ontological Framework for Understanding the Terror-Crime Nexus 

A Simple Ontology for the Analysis of Terrorist Attacks 

Ontology of Insider Threat Indicators 

Presentation 

Week 12 

Ontology of Secrets 

Falsehoods Programmers Believe 

Commonsense Theory of Secrets 

The Logic of Secrets 

Lies and Deception: An Unhappy Divorce 

Presentation 

Week 13 

Looking Ahead: Explainable AI 

Historical Perspective of Explainable AI 

Knowledge graphs as tools for explainable machine learning 

Causal Explanation  

What is ChatGPT Doing? 

Presentation 

Week 14 

Looking Ahead: Uses and Abuses of Knowledge Representation 

The Seer and the Seen 

Ethics of Artificial Intelligence for Intelligence Analysis 

An Exploration into Cognitive Bias in Ontologies 

The Tower of Babel Problem 

Presentation 

Week 15 

Presentations 

 

Presentation Final Project 

 

Academic Integrity 

Academic integrity is critical to the learning process. It is your responsibility as a student to complete your work in an honest fashion, upholding the expectations your individual instructors have for you in this regard. The ultimate goal is to ensure that you learn the content in your courses in accordance with UB’s academic integrity principles, regardless of whether instruction is in-person or remote.  Thank you for upholding your own personal integrity and ensuring UB’s tradition of academic excellence. The academic integrity policy is available at buffalo.edu/academic-integrity.  

Course Policy on the use of Artificial Intelligence 

Please see guidance on the use of AI tools in academic work here: https://www.buffalo.edu/academic-integrity/about/artificial-intelligence.html  

Accessibility Resources 

If you have any disability which requires reasonable accommodations to enable you to participate in this course, please contact the Office of Accessibility Resources in 60 Capen Hall, 716-645-2608 and also the instructor of this course during the first week of class. The office will provide you with information and review appropriate arrangements for reasonable accommodations, which can be found on the web at: http://www.buffalo.edu/studentlife/who-we-are/departments/accessibility.html. 

 

Protecting Course Materials Disclaimer 

All materials prepared and/or assigned by me for this course are for the students’ educational 

benefit. Other than for permitted collaborative work, students may not photograph, record, 

reproduce, transmit, distribute, upload, sell or exchange course materials, without my prior 

written permission. “Course materials” include, but are not limited to, all instructor-prepared and assigned materials, such as lectures; lecture notes; discussion prompts; study aids; tests and assignments; and presentation materials such as PowerPoint slides, Prezi slides, or transparencies; and course packets or handouts. Public distribution of such materials may also constitute copyright infringement in violation of federal or state law. Violation of this policy may additionally subject a student to a finding of “academic dishonesty” under the Academic Integrity Policy and/or disciplinary charges under the Student Code of Conduct. 

 

Counseling Services 

Students may experience a range of issues that can cause barriers to learning or reduce their ability to participate in daily activities. These might include strained relationships, anxiety, high levels of stress, alcohol/drug problems, feeling down, health concerns or unwanted sexual experiences. Counseling, Health Services, and Health Promotion are here to help with these or other concerns. Students can learn more about these programs and services by contacting: 

Counseling Services: 120 Richmond Quad (North Campus), phone 716-645-2720 and 1st Floor Michael Hall (South Campus), phone: 716-829-5800 

Student Health Services: 4350 Maple Rd., Amherst, NY 14226, phone: 716-829-3316 

Health Promotion: 114 Student Union (North Campus), phone: 716-645-2837 

Sexual Violence 

UB is committed to providing a safe learning environment free of all forms of discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, domestic and dating violence and stalking. If a student has experienced gender-based violence (i.e., intimate partner violence, attempted or completed sexual assault, harassment, coercion, stalking, etc.), UB has resources to help. This includes academic accommodations, health and counseling services, housing accommodations, helping with legal protective orders, and assistance with reporting the incident to police or other UB officials if the student so chooses. Contact UB’s Title IX Coordinator at 716-645-2266 for more information. For confidential assistance, students may also contact a Crisis Services Campus Advocate at 716-796-4399. 
